I was recently affected by the layoffs
made by Atlassian and I wanted to take
some time out to reflect on the time
that I spent working for Atlassian. I
worked there for about 8 years. During
that time, I built a lot of things and I
wanted to talk about what I built,
mainly the things that I personally
found interesting or that I'm proud of.
I hope that this video will be useful or
helpful to someone who perhaps is or was
in the same situation as me and maybe
it'll give them some inspiration in
terms of how they can tackle the same
things that I did or something similar
and perhaps avoid some of the mistakes
that I've made. I also might talk about
non-technical parts of my experience at
Atassian, although most of it will be
technical. And this video will be split
into chapters so that you can skip to
sections that are more interesting to
you rather than rather than watching the
video from start to finish. So I suppose
to start with I'll talk about when I was
first hired and even though I it was 8
years ago I still remember the interview
process which is different nowadays and
the reason why I was hired or at least
from my perspective the reason why I was
hired and the things that I started
working on during the start. So yeah,
let's just start at the interview
process. So I was interviewed by some
people that I now consider friends and I
remember having the impression while
being interviewed that these individuals
were quite intelligent and that was
something that was exciting for me. The
interview process consisted of a coding
quiz on hacker rank which I aced with
full marks. Then the first technical
interview was with two interviewers and
they gave me a white paper and asked me
to read it while they sat out of the
room for about 10 minutes. They came
back in and then asked me questions
about the white paper, asked me to
basically articulate what was in the
white paper and the white paper was
actually about custom domains and the
white paper was by Cloudflare. They then
asked me a few questions about things
like microservices and architectural
things like that. um containers and and
whatnot. And they were happy enough. I
don't remember the rest, but they were
happy enough with with me during that
stage. So, I continued to the uh second
technical interview, which was a
troubleshooting exercise where I was
asked to essentially prompt the
interviewer for information in order to
troubleshoot a a real incident that
occurred in Alassia. And it was a it was
an application problem that lead led to
a denial of service. Uh so, that was
fun. And then I think I was asked
something about how um latency based DNS
works and my answer was not accurate but
perhaps acceptable. I I I thought about
it from first principles and I thought
that that uh for example I thought that
route 53 did a triangulation based on
the actual latency of the client. But it
is more like that they use a uh they
probably use a geoloccation database in
order to do latency based routing of DNS
requests of the DNS answers. Sorry. Then
after that was a values uh interview and
to be honest I don't really remember
most of the questions for for the values
portion but I do remember one thing
which was when I asked the question of I
asked I asked the interviewer to think
about 12 months from now and to look
back retrospectively what is the thing
that I would have had to achieve in
order to for for you to say it was a
good decision hiring this person and
then they told me about a an application
that they needed to be built for the
platform within Atlassian and the
application would facilitate
self-service load balancing sort of
similar to if you were using Amazon
application load balances or the
equivalent in any cloud provider but for
the internal developers of Allesia and
it was essentially just a a framework
that I personally was not familiar with
and uh I said I could build it because I
had confidence in building web apps with
Python at that time and they accepted my
level of confidence and decided to hire
me. So that's the the interview portion
completed. So I joined Atlassian and
they have this classic saying or
impression that when you join at Lassen
that you are drinking from the fire hose
because there's so much information that
you have to absorb in the first few
weeks and months in order to just sort
of get going. My first my very first
task at least the task that I gave
myself was to build the application that
they had told me that they wanted. Let
me just open a browser and we'll take a
little look see at what I mean exactly.
Let me just uh move my face a little
bit. There's more real estate. Now
obviously Excalor is not what I care
about. So they wanted me to build an
open service broker. This is uh a a web
app with an API which facilitates the
provisioning of resources for a platform
essentially. So you can you can see here
um it's sort of built to operate in a
Kubernetes world where you're submitting
these provisioning requests as things
come up and down and it's going to bind
a resource to your pod or your cloud
instance or whatever it is as you can
see here. and it sort of sits in between
these real resources. So you might
provision something like a database and
then you'll get MySQL. So you'll get
something that's SQL compatible, but
that's abstracted away for your internal
developers. Anyhow, um the spec is uh is
here on GitHub. You can take a look at
it. It goes into it goes into like for
example the catalog endpoint and the
catalog lists all of the services and
plans that are available on the OSP and
uh just metadata about them and you
might say query the the service broker
and then display some of the metadata in
your maybe you've got a a console a
console like the Amazon console but
maybe you've got something like that
internally where developers can click
and provision things. In the Alassian
case, it was all through configuration
files that were committed to um version
control and then those would be uploaded
uh during uploaded from a build server
to deploy a service. Um but yeah, so you
might have you know other APIs like uh
provisioning here. So put and patch for
updating and deletes and blah blah blah.
So you would just basically go ahead and
and implement this or I mean if you
wanted to build your own and that is
essentially what I did. You can see also
there's a an open API document here that
has the endpoints.
So I chose to build this in in Python
using Lask. Oh no, in fact what I what I
built it with first is with a library
called connection. This is a Python
library which takes an open API document
and then creates the API handlers for
the paths for the API for the API routes
that are in that document which is cool.
But then we eventually I eventually
migrated that to just pure Flask and
then eventually migrated that to uh fast
API which I believe is what it still is
at the moment. Um, okay. So, it's the
first two weeks and my primary focus is
to build sort of what I promised in the
interview, which is this web app that's
going to be a broker for the platform
and is going to allow self-service
provisioning of load balancing in
Atlassian. So, like I mentioned earlier,
I started with this library called
connection, which took an open API
document, turned that into routes. But
I'm going to just go with uh what it
ended up as, which is a fast API app.
Let's just say we've got fast API here,
and then we've got uh a worker, and then
we have a database, which was Dynamo DB.
That's annoying. And we would have a
client making requests. That's why
that's the task API. The client would
say, &quot;Hey, please provision something
for me.&quot; And the web worker wouldn't do
it itself. It would actually send that
over SQS. It would drop the task details
into SQS and the worker would then
handle that. So, what does a
provisioning task actually look like?
It's something like creating DNS records
somewhere, maybe creating a CloudFront
distribution, maybe creating uh some API
calls, and this would be the
provisioning task that the worker would
do asynchronously while the web and
client would wait for it to be completed
essentially. So the client's polling
continuously to say, is it ready? Is it
ready? When it is completed, the worker
writes it to the database. The web
server checks the status and then
responds saying yes, it's finished or it
will say that something went wrong and
there was an error. So then we can sort
of encapsulate this as the open service
broker that I built. Pretty
straightforward. Um, to be honest,
there's not much more to this, but we're
going to go and talk about some of the
more complicated bits in just a second,
and I will directly link to this as
well. So, we've got this client
requesting, let's say, please provision
a load balancing, and that is
essentially what they were asking for
was some kind of load balancing
somewhere in the edge infrastructure of
Atlassian to allow traffic to go to
their service. So that's a good uh
demarcation point to start talking about
the next thing that I sort of built and
I built it through necessity of
essentially I began to understand and
unravel the requirements more as I went
along. One of the architects had this
idea to replace the load balances at
Elassian which were enterprise load
balances that had licensing costs with a
open-source cloudnative sort of
commodity proxy and the tech that we
chose for that was proxy. You may be
familiar with envoy proxy. If you're not
then it's very similar to something like
Engine X but perhaps more modern than
Engine X. Um you can take a look at its
you know what's what's great about it if
you want you can just read through like
why why choose envoy blah blah blah but
essentially we wanted to replace the
enterprise load balances we had make
them self-service so that devs
effectively didn't have to talk to us to
go set up their load balancing so MVOY
has an API that allows you to configure
it dynamically being able to reload the
configuration at runtime means that you
can deploy deploy a whole bunch of
proxies and have them sit there running
all the time and then when someone needs
different configuration for their
particular uh service then they can push
out a change through the provisioning
task detailed here and those changes
should flow to the proxy somehow and so
now that's a good time to talk about the
envoy management server that I built
which we called the envoy control plane
and this was it's essentially quite
similar uh uh to this. Yet again, we
used a fast API app, but this was
slightly different actually. Let's go
into a little bit of detail here. I'm
just going to wing this because I should
be able to wing it cuz I know it quite
well. Uh this is actually a I open
sourced this this software and I called
it Sovereign. You can actually go find
that on Bitbucket. It's it's a public
repo at least for now. I don't know if
that's going to be the case always, but
essentially Sovereign runs a fast API
app. And some of the things that it
takes in as
uh configuration are templates
and context. And so the app uh pulls
these uh it's obviously got like uh say
let's just say this is the
configuration. Okay, that's sticky now.
So the templates might be particular
resource types. And in envoy, you've got
stuff like clusters, routes, listeners,
and let's just leave it at that for the
moment. You'd have these kinds of
templates. And so when this when this
management server loads up, it'll read
in these templates in the context and
make these available as APIs for the uh
proxies. So then you can imagine let's
just say we've got uh an envoy here. It
is going to request these things and
sovereign is going to respond by taking
the context putting it into the
templates and rendering out different
content u as the context changes. Now
where does the context come from? Well
this is part of this management server
that is dynamic. So where let's just uh
let's just do a bit of flip around here.
put the context here. The context
actually comes from this database, but
we are requesting it from the broker. So
the we're requesting data from the
broker and other sources. In fact, let's
just add another source here. Let's just
say we have a little S3 bucket with some
data and maybe that data is changing
over time. So we take that data, it's
dynamic, we feed that into the
templates. the the templates have logic
that spits out particular envoy
configuration and then the proxy changes
over time. So what happens is we've got
a client that's making provisioning
requests to our broker. The worker is
doing some provisioning tasks and then
writing the new data to the database.
Then the the management server say pop
this just encapsulate this a little bit.
The management server is then pulling
that data from various places and
generating new configuration. That
configuration hits the proxy and then it
starts doing different stuff. That is
essentially the second part of what I
built. We've got a broker, we've got a
management server, we got the client, we
got the proxy. Uh why did this detach?
Anyway, so now we've sort of figured
this stuff out. This is all at a very
high level. So we've got this created.
Now we can sort of think more about more
infrastructure type things. We've got
this proxy, but how do we end up with
this proxy? How does that actually get
provisioned? What is it? Where does it
live? Well, let's start with one thing,
which is that these proxies,
there's many many many of them as you
would expect and they are provisioned by
um they are provisioned by a cloud
formation template. This is an AWS thing
that allows you to essentially do
infrastructure as code and it allows you
to create resources in in AWS that you
would normally create via the console if
you were just uh let's say a a basic
user. So what kind of stuff do we create
in here? Well, if we were to do this
stuff from scratch, we'd probably have
like a VPC and then we'd have uh, you
know, a subnet inside that VPC and maybe
we'd have an internet gateway. Maybe
we'd have uh uh good old security group.
Maybe we'd have a key pair. Maybe an AM
roll. Um, oh, of course, we need to have
the autoscaling group. Of course, that's
what's going to be uh creating these uh
EC2 instances.
And well, the autoscaling group needs
an AMI, doesn't it? Indeed, it does need
an AMI. AM RO has to be attached to um
has to be attached to all these. The key
pair goes on on these. Security group is
attached to the this. Well, it's
probably attached to the auto scanning
group to be fair. Well, the EC2
instances would inherit it from the from
the ASG blah blah blah. So, we've got
all these like uh blocks of resources
and stuff like that. Cool. Let's let's
put these up. Put these up together.
Blah blah blah. Cool. So, yeah, we've
kind of got like a little template going
on here and it's creating these proxies
in many different regions. Uh we might
have we might have like uh NLB in here,
layer 4 proxy. Maybe we'd have uh bit of
maybe a bit of ACM. Of course, these
acronyms might mean nothing to some
people, but for people that have used
AWS, they would know what these things
are. And they know it's not really that
complicated. It's like pretty basic
building blocks. And this is what we
created. Uh say 2,000 proxies, something
like 13 regions, blah blah blah. Um and
we also had a little bit of Route 53
records for for stuff. Now the AMI, it's
not really provisioned by the the
template. It's more like it's referenced
by the template, isn't it? So that would
bring us on to the next piece of this
thing that I built, which is well, we
need to produce an AMI. We need to
produce a standard image for these
proxies and it's going to include all
the important stuff in there. So how do
we create this image for the proxy?
Well, in this case, we had a repository
that was using Hashi called packer and
uh we had um a salt stack uh let's call
it configuration and so we would use
packer to um let's say we'd have the EC
we'd use the EC2 provisioner and so we
would create an EC2 in like a dev
account. We'd then upload all of our
salt stack configuration. Consult stack
by the way is very similar to puppet
anible chef in case you're not aware of
what those are. It is configuration
management tools and that's a fancy way
of saying that I want to run I want to
install packages put files and run
services on a machine in a particular
way in a particular order and it
automates that process makes that
process declarative for you well not for
you but it helps you to to make it
declarative. So we created a little um
create a little EC2 live running EC2
here. We dump the config on there. We do
a provisioning step and then we take the
uh essentially turn this into an image
like cut it down uh whatever snapshot it
and turn it into an image. So that
essentially would just produce this uh
AMI. Now what was included in here?
Let's let's say we can just uh we can
include a few things here. Let's just
say we had um we had states for for
envoy. So like let's say install
configure uh let's say just install and
configure envoy uh logging agent um
security uh let's say /h hardening
network tuning um containers uh tracing
oh let's just say let's just say uh
observability agent there and that can
cover that can cover logging tracing
metrics so that's essentially what's
going on here produces the AMI
cloudformation template takes this AMI
provision provisions these EC2s say EC2
and they're running with uh all this
stuff and then when they uh when they
get provisioned uh that's something that
we forgot here there's parameters
parameters bump that up bump this up
make it neat so we've got the parameters
and these at uh uh runtime would pass in
secrets and keys and blah blah blah and
then these these proxies would grab
their resources be configured and then
they would be running and accepting
traffic. Boom. That's it. Everything's
done working. This was essentially the
first two years of working at Atlassian.
So now when a developer says, I want to
run my service and I want it to be uh I
want it to be accessible on the internet
with all the fancy bells and whistles
and routing and advanced stuff. We'd say
yes, no problem. Let me just get that
provisioned for you. We send off the
provisioning task. We write something to
the database. We tell them it's ready.
and the management server hits the uh
broker says what's the current state of
things takes that data plus other data
puts it into the templates creates
resources out of those templates gives
them to envoy on when it requests them
and this was all pre uh provisioned it's
long lived infrastructure with cloud for
the cloudformation is relying on an AMI
that it can use to provision those
images those machines so yeah that is
probably the first 24 months. So what
was next after this? So this was the
foundation of our team essentially the
product that we were going forward with
um which is uh centralized load
balancing managed by our team and all of
the features that we provided to our
customers would live in logic defined in
these templates. We've now laid the
foundation for the team. We've got proxy
infrastructure that's reacting
dynamically to services that are being
deployed with different configurations
over time. What was next after that
point? The big thing after that was
taking some of the larger products and
making it possible for them to use this
platform component. That was one big
part. And the second big part was
migrating all of the microservices
within Atlassian to use this. And that
was relatively easier because we could
enforce that through the platform.
Essentially what that means is that the
platform was previously providing very
basic load balancing to every service
and they forced a switch to where you
could no longer expose your service
publicly through their load balancer
which was too basic and you had to go
through our centralized load balancing
infrastructure and to explicitly
configure it as a way of signaling your
intention for that service to be
publicly accessible. Whereas previous it
could have just been maybe accidental
that your service was public and not
very well protected. So that was the big
major push. We got products like Jira,
Confluence, Bitbucket, Status Page and
many others behind this edge
infrastructure. And then what was after
that? Well, now we can sort of talk more
about let's say we can talk more about
the uh the MVO based product that we had
here. So this particular thing we've got
this groundwork of being able to take
basic inputs from a developer and to
turn that into templated configuration.
Now Envoy has a lot of configuration. It
has a lot of stuff you can configure.
Let's just look at the routes for
example. Let's look at the virtual host
for example. You can configure what
domains to accept traffic on. Pretty
basic. You can do routing. sort of
basic, but once you delve into how you
can do this, it gets pretty complicated
pretty quickly. You can match on
different things. You can route it in
different ways. You can do direct
responses, you can do redirects, blah
blah blah. You can add and remove
headers. I guess I guess you could say
that's pretty standard. But you can also
choose, for example, when you're
configuring a route action, you can also
choose to send to any cluster that's on
the proxy. So then if I have a thousand
devs or a thousand services and they
each have their own cluster and any
route can send to any cluster. Well, it
sort of brings up this point of well
this data here needs to be validating
that and abstracting that and so on and
so forth. So there was definitely a
concentration of a lot of the
development work around this logic here.
Making sure it was validated here in
terms of the parameters were validated
such that when those parameters were run
through the logic in this in these
resources that it would produce valid
resources. Pretty standard I suppose you
could say. I don't know maybe I I do
feel like I have the curse of knowledge.
Um and that this stuff seems easier to
me now because I I've done so much with
it. Uh but there's a lot there's a lot
in here. And if we go into uh for
example extensions, there's a lot of
extensions that can be applied to a
listener or a or a cluster. For example,
you might have uh where is it? You've
got uh network filters here. You've got
all kinds of network filters. And a big
one that we obviously used was a HTTP
connection manager where you could
configure routing and how to handle
proxies and websockets and all this
stuff. And then if we go a little bit
before that, there's also things like
external processing and external
authorization. And this sort of brings
us to let's say something that happened
next. So I did briefly mention that some
of the big parts after building this was
to migrate big products onto it. Let's
assume that's all finished. It took it
took some time. It took probably a
couple years because there were many
features that needed to be built out
here and and wherever else in order to
support the larger products and their
special cases to work on what's
effectively a generic multi-tenented
platform. So let's just assume that
they're all migrated. Then we have more
features that we want to add. I did sort
of allude to like we have this we have
this groundwork. we have this dynamic
configuration. What I'm trying to say is
that we we created opportunity we
created opportunity to centralize logic
and to handle concerns early in the
chain of requests. What I mean by that
is a customer. Let's just make a c
smiley customer. A customer is someone
that's using our cloud products or
Atlassian cloud products. they are
hitting the uh let's just say they're
hitting an NLB first and that's then
being proxied to these boys. Yes, if we
can deal with the problems here before
they reach a service. Let's say let's
give a square. Let's call it a backend
service, you know. So, the requests are
flowing in from the customer to the
proxies and to the pretty standard
stuff. If we can deal with certain
concerns here before it reaches here, we
save a lot of time. We save some money
which is and it saves the customer time.
It's great for everyone really. Um, and
one of those things, now this is where
the the diagram becomes complicated. So,
let's move off to the side. Let's just
copy a few of these. Let's grab three
things and let's move over to the side.
So, we've got the customer talking to
the proxy and the proxy is talking to
the back end. And of course, the request
comes back up and back out to the
customer. Fine and dandy. Yes, this is a
this is a proxy. Whatever. There's no
surprises here. Now with our with with
the products that Atlassian runs,
there's all kinds of stuff that needs to
happen like authentication for example
or authorization or uh DOS protection or
rate limiting or access logs all this
kinds of stuff that needs to happen. And
it's just turns out that we can deal
with them here instead of on a bazillion
bazillion backend services. Just imagine
that there are a bazillion bazillion of
these. Just zillions upon zillions. See
daisy. Just zillions and zillions. A
gazillion. Now, can you imagine if a
thousand dev teams needed to deal with
all this stuff plus more on their own
service? It would be a tremendous waste
of money for the company. It would slow
down features. The customer wouldn't get
their features when they need them. and
stuff is already hard enough to deliver
as it is. Thus the platform and
centralized management of resources and
centralized uh implementation of these
features. So how how were some of these
things implemented? Well, EOS protection
was really provided by uh CloudFront and
that was that was uh spearheaded by a
colleague of mine who is very smart and
conscientious and essentially let's make
this a bit more accurate. Let's just say
let's get rid of these. There's an NLB
here. Blah blah blah blah blah blah. And
of course, it's two-way. So, that's one
way that we can take care of that
concern for these backend services.
Great. We've solved solved a concern for
that. Fantastic. These others, well,
access logs, what we can do is something
like we can use these network filters.
Yes, we use the network filters. For
example, in the HCM, we have
Where are the access logs? Access log.
Now remember all of this configuration
is dynamic. It's all dynamic and it is
created by templates which abstract away
the resource configuration from the
developer who wants to configure it.
They provide simple parameters. Those
parameters are then validated and then
they are fed into the template as
context so that we produce the correct
template. That means that they send us a
little bit of JSON and we set up this
whole thing for them with all the access
logging and blah blah blah whatever. So
that is done in fact inside the proxy
natively. Fantastic. Some of these
things however a little bit more
complicated. These things we need to use
a sidecar model where envoy is talking
out the side and then these are their
own services running locally on the on
the proxy. So these would be like uh
containers essentially. We've got this
sidecar model and those sidecars some of
them were contributed by other teams and
some of them were created by me and our
team. The authentication and the
authentication sidec was created by me
written of course in the lord's language
rust authorization was done by another
team and rate limiting was done by
another team and so they were able to
contribute these sidecars which by the
way were set up and uh were downloaded
and configured onto the AMI by this
provisioning uh AMI provisioning flow.
Great. So now we have a programmable
proxy with sidec cars that have their
own separate logic from the proxy and
they too can actually receive
configuration which is dynamic over the
wire locally and uh and make it even
more programmable. So we're solving all
these concerns before they hit these uh
these backends and in very very little
time. So that was uh essentially that is
some of the stuff I worked on after
migrations and blah blah blah. Yay. What
do I do after that? Let's move this big
blob rid of this mess. So then we had
some 